Tunip (#1)
yelite/tvm-rfcs: rfcs/0074-tvmscript-unified-printer.md

- Feature Name: TUNIP: TVMScript Unified Printer
- Start Date: 05/25/2022
- RFC PR: [apache/tvm-rfcs#0000](https://github.com/apache/tvm-rfcs/pull/0000)
- GitHub Issue: [apache/tvm#0000](https://github.com/apache/tvm/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This RFC proposes to modularize and infrastructuralize the existing TVMScript
printer, to develop unified printing mechanism across TVM stack, where TIR,
Relax and any future vendor-specific IR are all treated equally as dialects and

> could be printed together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
could be printed together without potential conflict in engineering.
```

Author: Done

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

TVMScript, as a roundtrippable python-based text format, is
the central piece of TVM performance productivity. As the frontend of TVM, it
enables end users to directly construct the TVM IR, either TIR or Relax, in a
pragmatic approach. From Relax to MetaSchedule and TIR, TVMScript enables
inspectability and reproducibility at any level of compilation and
optimization. Furthermore, based on TVMScript, developers are empowered to
intercept, manipulate and customize the compiler behavior in a principled way.

While TVMScript is gaining traction and buy-in from the open source community,
the TVMScript printer suffers from multiple profound design issues:
Not supporting IR fragment printing requires users to jump in-between
TVMScript syntax and TIRText syntax; The lack of modularity leads to practical
inability to scale up to and maintain multiple IRs without engineering
conflicts; Enhancing co-existence of multi-level IRs often leads to

> re-engineering of existing features.

Reviewer: maybe use bullet points?

Author: Done

**Goal.** This RFC introduces Tvmscript UNIfied Printer (TUNIP), a systematic
redesign to
address those engineering, usability and scalability issues above. The goal of
this re-design includes:

**Goal 1 [Unified Representation].** Become the unified roundtrippable
representation of TIR and Relax, allowing systematic mixing of IRs or IR
fragments (Relax + TIR) in the same IRModule in the target language (for
example, python, C++). 

The current TVMScript printer only supports TIR. An experimental printer is
being developed at
[https://github.com/tlc-pack/relax/blob/relax/src/printer/relax_script_printer.cc](https://github.com/tlc-pack/relax/blob/relax/src/printer/relax_script_printer.cc)
for Relax, which needs to handle cases where TIR is embedded in Relax (for
instance, https://github.com/tlc-pack/relax/pull/149). By having a unified
approach for printing IR tree to TVMScript, we will be able to implement a

> fully-fledged printer for Relax and TIR with minimal effort.

Reviewer: This is a bit vague. Let's make the following points here:
- Currently TVMScript is designed specifically for printing TIR, and printing multiple dialects together was not a design goal at that time;
- Therefore, supporting Relax requires ad-hoc hacks around the system
- The RFC address this issue by blah

Author: Done

**Goal 2 [Third-Party IRs in Multi-Stage Compilation].** Modularize and
infrastructuralize the printer to support more future IRs or third-party IRs at
any level with maintainability, for example, IRs at lower-level than TIR, or
Relax VM executable.

The current TVMScript printer is tightly coupled with TIR by being a subclass
of TIR-specific functors. This design isn’t scalable when we want to support
more IRs

```cpp
class TVMScriptPrinter : public tir::StmtFunctor<Doc(const tir::Stmt&)>,
                         public tir::ExprFunctor<Doc(const PrimExpr&, ExprPrecedence*)>,
                         public TypeFunctor<Doc(const Type&)>  
{...}
```

More importantly, it’s impossible for the current approach to support

> third-party IR bteing registered in a dynamic library.

Reviewer: A second thought: example for the existing work is not necessary. Just put a link here for people who are interested to see, while we focus on our new design

Author: Updated

```
ValueError: StructuralEqual check failed, first delta highlighted below

@T.prim_func
def func_a(A: T.Buffer[(1,), "int32"]) -> None:
                       ^^^^
    A[0] = 0

@T.prim_func
def func_b(A: T.Buffer[(8,), "int32"]) -> None:
                       ^^^^
    A[0] = 0
```

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

This section introduces the design philosophy of the printer, and demonstrates
the proposed user-facing APIs where users means IR developers.

## Two-Stage Translation

Traditionally in TVM stack, printing is a single-stage process. The printer
assumes certain syntax of the target language, and therefore, so far there are
3 different printers all for TIR: ReprPrinter, TIRTextPrinter,
TVMScriptPrinter.

The Doc DSL (not to be confused with the Doc class at
[https://github.com/apache/tvm/blob/main/src/printer/doc.h#L67](https://github.com/apache/tvm/blob/main/src/printer/doc.h#L67))
is introduced to allow better consistency and scalability. An IR, which could
be TIR, Relax or any other ones developed by third-party vendors, is first
translated to an intermediate Doc DSL, and then the DSL is mapped to a target

> language, for example, Python, C++ IRBuilder API, or Rust.

Reviewer: Let's reword it a little bit to minimize the novelty (industry doesnt like novel things). Say something like we extend the idea of the existing Doc class

Author: Updated

> **Stage 1 [TVM IR ⇒ Doc]**. On the first stage, the printer needs to take care

Reviewer: let's avoid unicode if possible

Author: Updated

# Statements
StmtDoc(Array<String> comments) # Base class
AssignDoc(ExprDoc lhs, Optional<ExprDoc> rhs, Optional<ExprDoc> annotation)
IfDoc(ExprDoc predicate, Array<StmtDoc> then_branch, Array<StmtDoc> else_branch)
WhileDoc(ExprDoc predicate, Array<StmtDoc> body)
ForDoc(ExprDoc lhs, ExprDoc rhs, Array<StmtDoc> body)
ScopeDoc(Optional<ExprDoc> lhs, ExprDoc rhs, Array<StmtDoc> body)
ExprStmtDoc(ExprDoc expr)

# Special Docs
SliceDoc(Optional<ExprDoc> start, Optional<ExprDoc> stop)
FunctionDoc(IdDoc name, Array<AssignDoc> args, Array<ExprDoc> decorators, ExprDoc return_type, Array<StmtDoc> body))
ClassDoc(IdDoc name, Array<ExprDoc> decorators, Array<AssignDoc> aliases, Array<FunctionDoc> functions)
```

## IRDocsifier Spec

IRDocsifier is responsible for transforming IR node tree into Doc tree. Its API
looks like

```cpp
class IRDocsifierNode : public Object {
 public:
  // ir_prefix maintains a map from dispatch_token to ir prefix
  // so that the print function can construct an expression with
  // the current ir prefix, like `T.xxx` in TIR and `R.xxx` in Relax 
  Map<String, String> ir_prefix;
  // SymbolTable maintains the mapping from IR node to Doc

>   SymbolTable sym;

Reviewer: maybe find a better name than symbol table?

Author: Updated to `TranslationTable`.. Not sure if it's better

  Array<Frame> frames;
  Array<String> dispatch_tokens;

  /*!
   * \brief Transform the input object into TDoc
   */

> 	template <class TDoc>

Reviewer: nit: indent

Author: Updated

      using runtime::DLDataType2String;
      return TIR(p)->Attr(DLDataType2String(ty->dtype));
    });

// Explanation:
// 1. Here we register the print function of the PrimType node in TIR
// 2. The first arg to the `set_dispatch` function is the dispatch token
//    It's optional and represents the name of IR
// 3. The first argument to the print function is the node to be printed
// 4. The second argument is instance of `IRDocsifier`, which can be used
//    to recursively translate the child nodes.
// 5. The print method returns a subclass of Doc

TVM_STATIC_IR_FUNCTOR(IRDocsifier, vtable).set_dispatch<Range>([](Range e, IRDocsifier p) {
  return SliceDoc(p->AsExprDoc(e->min), p->AsExprDoc(e->min + e->extent));
});

// The first arg to the `set_dispatch` can be omitted, and 
// the print function will be registered the default layer.
// It will be called by default and can be overriden by registering
// another print function under an IR name. For example,

TVM_STATIC_IR_FUNCTOR(IRDocsifier, vtable).set_dispatch<Range>("relax", [](Range e, IRDocsifier p) {
  ...
});

// The function above will be called instead of the previous one, 

> // if Printer is printing relax.

Reviewer: nit: put docs above actual code

Author: Updated

template <class TDoc>
TDoc AsDoc(const ObjectRef& obj) const {
  return Downcast<TDoc>(AsDocImpl(obj));
}
```

## Frame Spec

Frame provides the contextual information during printing. Most commonly, frame
contains variable defined in the current scope (like tir function, tir block,
tir loop). A subclass of Frame can be created to store more specific
information. For instance, `TIRLoopFrame` should contain the information about
the TIR for loop in order to print iter var remapping when printing
BlockRealize.

```cpp
class FrameNode : public Object {
 public:
  Array<ObjectRef> objs;
  SymbolTableNode* sym;

  /*!
   * \brief Set the name of a variable IR node
   */
	virtual IdDoc DefByName(const ObjectRef& obj, const String& name);
  /*!
   * \brief Set the doc of a variable IR node
   * \details This is useful when the variable is implicitly defined in the TVMScript.
   *          For example, when defining a `tir::Buffer buf`, buf->data is also a tir::Var,
   *          which should be printed as `buf.data`, rather than an identifier
   *          in the TVMScript.
   */
  virtual ExprDoc DefByDoc(const ObjectRef& obj, const ExprDoc& doc);
}
```

> ## Folder Structure

Reviewer: let's move this upward to `Goal 1` to calm the readers down...

Author: I copied a simplified version to Goal 1

Reviewer: no need for this section given it's already part of Goal 1

Author: Ok, it's removed now

```
src/script/printer/
├── doc.cc
├── doc.h
├── doc_printer.cc
├── doc_printer.h
├── frame.cc
├── frame.h
├── functor.h
├── ir_docsifier.cc
├── ir_docsifier.h
├── symbol_table.cc
├── symbol_table.h
├── tir 
│   ├── buffer.cc
│   ├── expr.cc
│   ├── function.cc
│   ├── op.cc
│   ├── stmt.cc
│   ├── tir.h
│   ├── type.cc
│   ├── utils.h
│   └── var.cc
├── tvmscript_unified_printer.cc
├── util.cc

> └── util.h

Reviewer: A couple of ideas:
- public header files belong to `include/tvm/script/printer` instead of the private `src` folder
- no need to include every detail, but only deliver the core idea.
- it's always better to annotate directly in the figure instead of explaining later in text.

For example:

```
src/script/printer/
├── core  # core infra, which is IR-agnostic
├── tir   # TIR dialect
├── relax # hypothetical Relax dialect (not part of our RFC)
```

Author: Updated

});

// The first arg to the `set_dispatch` can be omitted, and 
// the print function will be registered the default layer.
// It will be called by default and can be overriden by registering
// another print function under an IR name. 

// This function will be called instead of the previous one, 
// if Printer is printing relax.
TVM_STATIC_IR_FUNCTOR(IRDocsifier, vtable).set_dispatch<Range>("relax", [](Range e, IRDocsifier p) {
  ...
});
```

- Dispatch

```cpp
auto tir_dispatch_ctx = ir_docsifier->WithDispatchToken("tir");
Doc doc = ir_docsifier->AsDoc<Doc>(node);

// Here we setup the ir_docsifier to call print functions under 
// the 'tir' dispatch token, and then call the AsDoc method to 
// translate `node`, as an ObjectRef, into `Doc`, by using the 
// print functions registered in the dispatch table.

template <class TDoc>
TDoc AsDoc(const ObjectRef& obj) const {
  return Downcast<TDoc>(AsDocImpl(obj));
}
```

## Frame Spec

Frame provides the contextual information during printing. Most commonly, frame
contains variable defined in the current scope (like tir function, tir block,
tir loop). A subclass of Frame can be created to store more specific

> information. For instance, `TIRLoopFrame` should contain the information about

Reviewer: ```suggestion
information. For instance, `tir::ForLoopFrame` should contain the information about
```

Author: Updated

the TIR for loop in order to print iter var remapping when printing
BlockRealize.

```cpp
class FrameNode : public Object {
 public:
  Array<ObjectRef> objs;
  TranslationTableNode* translation_table;

  /*!
   * \brief Set the name of a variable IR node
   */
	virtual IdDoc DefByName(const ObjectRef& obj, const String& name);
  /*!
   * \brief Set the doc of a variable IR node
   * \details This is useful when the variable is implicitly defined in the TVMScript.
   *          For example, when defining a `tir::Buffer buf`, buf->data is also a tir::Var,
   *          which should be printed as `buf.data`, rather than an identifier
   *          in the TVMScript.
   */
  virtual ExprDoc DefByDoc(const ObjectRef& obj, const ExprDoc& doc);
}
```

## Upgrade Plan

`IRModule.script()` is the current way to print TIR into TVMScript. It calls
the `script.AsTVMScript` function registered at
`scr/printer/tvmscript_printer.cc`. We plan to split the whole upgrading process 
into 5 steps.

> 1. Without breaking change to existing functionality, upstream system
>    components piece by piece with small PRs under a tracking issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Without breaking change to existing functionality, upstream system
   components piece by piece with small PRs under a tracking issue.
   This new system mainly locates in `src/script`, which does not affect
   the functionality of the existing TVMScript printer.
```

> 2. Expose the unified printer as a global TVM function `script.Print`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Expose the unified printer as a global TVM function `script.printer.Script`, which is parallel
to the existing printer.
```

> 3. Add a boolean flag `use_legacy_printer` to the Python `IRModule.script`,
>    default to False. `IRModule.script` will call `script.Print` if `use-legacy_printer==True`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Add a boolean flag `use_legacy_printer` to the Python `IRModule.script`,
   which defaults to True. `IRModule.script` calls `script.printer.Print` if `use_legacy_printer`
   is explicitly turned off.
```

> 4. Change the default value `use_legacy_printer` to `True`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. After stabilizing the new infra, change the default value `use_legacy_printer` to `True`, following the convention of deprecation.
```

> 5. After two releases, deprecate the `use_legacy_printer` flag and clean up legacy code.

Reviewer: No need to mention how many release cycles it takes.

```suggestion
5. Finally, deprecate the `use_legacy_printer` flag and clean up legacy code. 
```
